Google Colab Link: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1i6cbDxjWZAmnGFUynfLYsyxbBFSaDjQP?usp=sharing

🚖 NYC Motor Vehicle Collisions Analysis

Course: Data Engineering and Visualization (Winter 2025)

Institution: German International University

Project Milestone: 1

📌 Project Overview

This project navigates the complete Data Engineering process using real-world data from NYC Open Data. We constructed an ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) pipeline to clean, standardize, and integrate over 2 million crash records with person-level data.

The final output is an Interactive Web Dashboard built with Python Dash & Plotly, allowing users to explore crash trends, hotspots, and contributing factors dynamically.

🚀 Features

Data Integration: Merges "Motor Vehicle Collisions - Crashes" with "Persons" data.

Interactive Dashboard:

Dropdown Filters: Filter by Borough and Vehicle Type.

Search Mode: Type queries like "Brooklyn 2022 pedestrian" to auto-filter data.

"Generate Report" Button: Updates all visualizations on demand to ensure performance.

Advanced Visualizations: Includes geospatial maps, heatmaps of crash times, and seasonality trends.

🛠️ Installation & Local Setup

To run this project locally on your machine, follow these steps:


2. Install Dependencies

Ensure you have Python installed. Install the required libraries using pip:

pip install -r requirements.txt


(Note: If requirements.txt is missing, install: pandas plotly dash gunicorn)

3. Prepare the Data

Ensure the data file is located at data/nyc_crashes_final.zip.

Important: The zip file must contain only the nyc_crashes_final.csv file.

If you encounter a "Multiple files found" error, unzip the file, remove any hidden folders (like .ipynb_checkpoints), and re-zip just the CSV.

4. Run the Application

python app.py


Open your web browser and go to http://127.0.0.1:8050/.

☁️ Deployment

This application is designed to be deployed on cloud platforms like Render or Vercel.

Source: The code is hosted on GitHub.

Build Command: pip install -r requirements.txt

Start Command: gunicorn app:server (for Render) or python app.py (for local/testing).

Data Handling: The dataset is compressed (.zip) to adhere to GitHub's file size limits (<100MB) while maintaining over 1 million rows of data.

👥 Team Members & Contributions

👤 Member 1: Farida (Setup & Data Loading)

Role: Initial Setup

Initialized the environment and loaded raw data from NYC Open Data APIs.

Parsed datetime columns to enable temporal analysis (Year/Month/Hour).

Removed duplicate crash records to ensure data integrity.

👤 Member 2: Roba (Cleaning & Standardization)

Role: Data Cleaning

Standardized Borough names (e.g., "BKLYN" → "BROOKLYN") and imputed missing values using the Mode.

Cleaned "Contributing Factors" by removing numeric garbage data.

Grouped high-cardinality vehicle types (e.g., "4 dr sedan" → "Sedan") for better dashboard filtering.

👤 Member 3: Sara (Data Integration)

Role: Merging Datasets

Aggregated the "Persons" dataset by COLLISION_ID to prevent row explosion.

Performed a Left Join to integrate person counts into the main Crashes dataset.

Handled post-integration null values and optimized data types for memory efficiency.

👤 Member 4: Omar (Visualization & Optimization)

Role: EDA & Export

Created 10 interactive visualizations using Plotly Express (Maps, Heatmaps, Bar Charts).

Optimized the final dataset for web deployment by removing unused text columns (Street Names) to keep file size under 100MB.

👤 Member 5: Abdelrahman (Website & Reporting)

Role: Web Development

Built the Dash application layout and logic.

Implemented the "Generate Report" interactivity and Search Mode.

Deployed the application and compiled the final project findings.

📂 Project Structure

├── app.py                  # Main Dash application code
├── data/
│   └── nyc_crashes_final.zip # Processed & compressed dataset
├── assets/                 # CSS/Images for the dashboard
├── notebook.ipynb          # Jupyter Notebook with full ETL pipeline & analysis
├── requirements.txt        # Python dependencies
└── README.md               # Project documentation
